[ENH] Add BEP032 (microelectrode electrophysiology) specification (#1705)
bids-standard/bids-specification: src/modality-specific-files/microelectrode-electrophysiology.md

!!! example "Example datasets"

    Several [example microelectrode electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-examples/#microephys)
    have been formatted using this specification
    and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

## Terminology: Modality and Datatypes

The Microelectrode Electrophysiology modality encompasses recordings made with micrometer-scale electrodes,
distinguishing it from related BIDS modalities (EEG, MEG, iEEG) that use larger electrodes.
This modality is primarily used in animal research.

Within this modality, BIDS defines two datatypes based on fundamentally different recording techniques (see [Issue #1800](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/1800)):

-   **`ecephys`** (Extracellular Electrophysiology): Electrodes remain in the extracellular space,
    measuring field potentials (μV) from nearby neurons without membrane penetration.
    Examples: Neuropixels probes, tetrodes, multi-electrode arrays.

-   **`icephys`** (Intracellular Electrophysiology): Electrodes penetrate or attach to cell membranes to directly measure
    intracellular potentials (mV) and cellular dynamics.

>     Examples: cell-attached patch clamp, whole-cell patch clamp, sharp electrode recordings.

Reviewer: sharp electrodes can also be used to record extracellular, especially when the exposed tip is large enough (1 um or larger). See for example https://www.thomasrecording.com/np-electrodes-fm-single-electrodes.

I find this "sharp electrode recordings" example therefore more confusing than clarifying, and therefore suggest to drop it.

  "PharmaceuticalDoseAmount": [1.5, 10],
  "PharmaceuticalDoseUnits": ["percent", "mg/kg"],
  "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
  "BodyPartDetails": "Motor Cortex",
  "SampleEnvironment": "in-vivo",
  "TaskName": "ExampleTask",
  "TaskDescription": "Description of the experimental task"
}
```

### Example `*_icephys.json`

```JSON
{
  "InstitutionName": "Example Institute",
  "InstitutionAddress": "456 Science Ave, City, State 67890, Country",
  "PowerLineFrequency": 60,
  "Manufacturer": "PatchClampManufacturer",
  "ManufacturersModelName": "Amplifier-ABC",
  "SamplingFrequency": 20000,
  "SoftwareName": "PatchSoftware",
  "SoftwareVersions": "2.1.0",
  "SoftwareFilters": {
    "BesselFilter": {
      "Half-amplitude cutoff (Hz)": 10000,
      "Roll-off": "12dB/Octave"
    }
  },
  "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
  "BodyPartDetails": "Visual Cortex",
  "SampleEnvironment": "ex-vivo",
  "SliceThickness": 300,
  "TaskName": "MembraneProperties",
  "TaskDescription": "Characterization of intrinsic properties"
}
```

## Coordinate Systems for Electrode Positions

Microelectrode electrophysiology supports two approaches for specifying electrode positions:

> ### Default: Probe-Relative Coordinates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Required: Probe-Relative Coordinates
```

## Electrodes description (`*_electrodes.tsv`)

Electrodes are the physical recording sites that make electrical contact with neural tissue to capture electrophysiological signals.

The electrode positions and properties are stored in a `.tsv` file (amplifier information is in `channels.tsv`).

This file contains the following information:

-   The electrode name
-   The electrode coordinates in 3 columns (`xyz`) (use `n/a` for values if a dimension is absent). By default, this is the position on the probe (not the brain).
-   The ID of the probe the electrode is located on

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysElectrodes") }}

### Example `*_electrodes.tsv`

**Extracellular electrophysiology example (probe-relative coordinates):**

```tsv
name	probe_name	hemisphere	x	y	z	impedance	shank_id	size	material	location
e001	probe01	L	0	0	0	1.2	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e002	probe01	L	0	0	25	1.1	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e003	probe01	L	0	0	50	1.3	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e004	probe01	L	0	0	75	1.4	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e005	probe02	R	0	0	0	2.1	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e006	probe02	R	0	0	15	2.3	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e007	probe02	R	0	0	30	1.9	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1

> e008	probe02	R	0	0	45	2.0	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
e001	probe01	L	0	0	n/a	1.2	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e002	probe01	L	0	25	n/a	1.1	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e003	probe01	L	0	50	n/a	1.3	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e004	probe01	L	0	75	n/a	1.4	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e005	probe02	R	0	0	n/a	2.1	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e006	probe02	R	0	15	n/a	2.3	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e007	probe02	R	0	30	n/a	1.9	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e008	probe02	R	0	45	n/a	2.0	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
```

Reviewer 2: I would also be fine with moving position to x and having both y and z be n/a, but I think what I have proposed is the more common convention

```

## Surgical Coordinates System

The surgical coordinates system provides a standard way to describe the placement of an intracranial probe implantation during surgery.

### Anatomical Reference Points

In neurosurgery and research, it is important to define coordinates for where in the brain a surgical intervention will take place.
These coordinates rely on anatomical markers that are uniform across individuals.
There are two major anatomical markers on the dorsal surface of the brain that are formed when the plates of the skull fuse during development, and these markers are often used to identify the location of various anatomical structures of the brain.

<img src="images/bregma_and_lambda.png" alt="Bregma and Lambda anatomical reference points" style="max-width: 600px;">

**Bregma**: the anatomical point on the skull at which the coronal suture (between frontal and parietal bones) is intersected perpendicularly by the sagittal suture (between left and right parietal bones).

**Lambda**: the meeting point of the sagittal suture (between left and right parietal bones) and the lambdoid suture (between parietal and occipital bones).

> Both points serve as standard reference points for stereotaxic coordinates in neuroscience research. `(0,0,0)` is assumed to be Bregma when working with rodents. It may optionally be defined differently using `coordinate_reference_point`, and MUST be defined for other species.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both points serve as standard reference points for stereotaxic coordinates in neuroscience research. `(0,0,0)` is assumed to be Bregma when working with rodents. It may optionally be defined differently using `anatomical_reference_point`, and MUST be defined for other species.
```

  <!-- TODO: Add 'StereoTaxic', 'AllenCCFv3', 'PaxinosWatson', etc coordinate systems to appendix coordinate-systems.md under "Microelectrode Electrophysiology Specific Coordinate Systems" with appropriate definitions for each standard reference frame used in animal electrophysiology -->
-   `*_space-individual` (electrodes are localized in subject-specific anatomical coordinate system)
-   `*_space-AllenCCFv3` (electrodes are mapped to Allen Common Coordinate Framework v3)
-   `*_space-PaxinosWatson` (electrodes are mapped to Paxinos-Watson rat brain atlas coordinates)

When referring to the `*_electrodes.tsv` file in a certain *space* as defined
above, the [`space-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#space) of the accompanying `*_coordsystem.json` MUST
correspond.

For example:

<!-- This block generates a file tree.
A guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_filetree_example(
   {
   "sub-01": {
      "sub-01_electrodes.tsv": "",
      "sub-01_space-StereoTaxic_electrodes.tsv": "",

>       "sub-01_space-StereoTaxic_coordsystem.json": "",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      "sub-01_space-AllenCCFv3_electrodes.tsv": "",
      "sub-01_space-AllenCCFv3_coordsystem.json": "",
```

-   The electrode coordinates in 3 columns (`xyz`) (use `n/a` for values if a dimension is absent). By default, this is the position on the probe (not the brain).
-   The ID of the probe the electrode is located on

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysElectrodes") }}

### Example `*_electrodes.tsv`

**Extracellular electrophysiology example (probe-relative coordinates):**

```tsv
name	probe_name	hemisphere	x	y	z	impedance	shank_id	size	material	location
e001	probe01	L	0	0	0	1.2	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e002	probe01	L	0	0	25	1.1	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e003	probe01	L	0	0	50	1.3	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e004	probe01	L	0	0	75	1.4	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e005	probe02	R	0	0	0	2.1	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e006	probe02	R	0	0	15	2.3	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e007	probe02	R	0	0	30	1.9	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e008	probe02	R	0	0	45	2.0	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
```

**Intracellular electrophysiology example:**

```tsv
name	probe_name	hemisphere	x	y	z	impedance	pipette_solution	internal_pipette_diameter	external_pipette_diameter	material	location
patch01	pipette01	L	0	0	0	5.2	K-gluconate	1.5	2.5	borosilicate-glass	VISp2/3
patch02	pipette02	R	0	0	0	4.8	K-gluconate	1.5	2.5	borosilicate-glass	VISp2/3

> sharp01	pipette03	L	0	0	0	80	3M KCl	0.5	1.0	borosilicate-glass	PL5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
name	probe_name	hemisphere	x	y	z	impedance	pipette_solution	internal_pipette_diameter	external_pipette_diameter	material	location
patch01	pipette01	L	n/a	n/a	n/a	5.2	K-gluconate	1.5	2.5	borosilicate-glass	VISp2/3
patch02	pipette02	R	n/a	n/a	n/a	4.8	K-gluconate	1.5	2.5	borosilicate-glass	VISp2/3
sharp01	pipette03	L	n/a	n/a	n/a	80	3M KCl	0.5	1.0	borosilicate-glass	PL5
```

# Microelectrode Electrophysiology

Support for Microelectrode Electrophysiology was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals) [BEP032: Animal electrophysiology (ephys)](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/bep032).
Please see [Citing BIDS](../introduction.md#citing-bids) on how to appropriately credit this extension
when referring to it in the context of the academic literature.

This BEP was initiated by members of the INCF Working Group on Standardized Data Structures in 2020
to develop specifications and tools for standardizing experimental data recorded with animal models
in neuroscience and its associated metadata.

!!! example "Example datasets"

    Several [example microelectrode electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-examples/#microephys)
    have been formatted using this specification
    and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

## Terminology: Modality and Datatypes

The Microelectrode Electrophysiology modality encompasses recordings made with micrometer-scale electrodes,
distinguishing it from related BIDS modalities (EEG, MEG, iEEG) that use larger electrodes.

> This modality is primarily used in animal research.

Reviewer 2: I don't know. The issue is that electrodes exist in physical space and channels don't really. They are often the result of some sort of wiring configuration, but at the end of the day a channel is a data stream, not a physical object, and the attributes of that table describe information about the data and data transformations, not the physical device on which it was collected.

   {
   "sub-01": {
      "ses-01": {
         "ecephys": {
            "sub-01_ses-01_electrodes.tsv": "",
            "sub-01_ses-01_space-StereoTaxic_electrodes.tsv": "",
            "sub-01_ses-01_space-StereoTaxic_coordsystem.json": "",
            "sub-01_ses-01_probes.tsv": "",
            },
         },
      },
   }
) }}

## Channels description (`*_channels.tsv`)

Channels are recorded signals.
These may be of neuronal origin (for example, online filtered LFP signals) or generated by the recording setup
(for example, synchronization or behavioral signals).

The channel properties are stored in a `.tsv` file.
This file contains the following information:

-   `channel_id`
-   `electrode_id` (in the case of neuronal signals)
-   Amplifier information
-   …

This table stores information about the recorded signals, *not* the electrodes. The distinction is particularly important in cases where multiple signals are recorded from a single electrode (such as Neuropixel probes). For more information about the distinction between electrodes and channels, see [the corresponding section in iEEG](./intracranial-electroencephalography.md#terminology-electrodes-vs-channels).

> Columns in the `*_channel.tsv` file are:

Author: ```suggestion
Columns in the `*_channels.tsv` file are:
```

For custom probes, reference them using a [BIDS URI](../common-principles.md#bids-uri) with the `bids::` prefix in the `TermURL` field:

```json
"model": {
    "Levels": {
        "customprobe1": {
            "Description": "Custom experimental probe",
            "TermURL": "bids::probes/customprobe1.json"
        }
    }
}
```

Example file structure:

<!-- This block generates a file tree.
A guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_filetree_example(
   {
   "probes": {
      "customprobe1.json": "",
      "customprobe2.json": "",
      "...": "",
      },
   }
) }}

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysProbes") }}

### Example `*_probes.tsv`

**Extracellular electrophysiology example:**

```tsv

> probe_name	type	AP	ML	DV	AP_angle	ML_angle	rotation_angle	hemisphere	manufacturer	device_serial_number	electrode_count	width	height	depth	dimension_unit	coordinate_reference_point	associated_brain_region	associated_brain_region_id	reference_atlas	material

Author: note: at our meeting Oct 15th 2025 we briefly touched on a possible topic of introducing `probe-<label>` entity! It would reflect that actual recordings directly from hardware do ATM store each probe separately and it could be that there are different manufacturers/types of probes.  That would then mandate pretty much to have `probe_id` (`probe-<label>`) as the leading column in the `*probes.tsv` file (which would exist then to summarize across probes, potentially even may be benefitting from inheritance principle for common metadata?).

Here `probe_name` came from analogy to `name` of `electrodes.tsv` inherited from EEG.  But the question remains whether we might want to standardize this right away.  WDYT @effigies ?  Should we may be right away introduce `probe` entity?

```

## Surgical Coordinates System

The surgical coordinates system provides a standard way to describe the placement of an intracranial probe implantation during surgery.

### Anatomical Reference Points

In neurosurgery and research, it is important to define coordinates for where in the brain a surgical intervention will take place.
These coordinates rely on anatomical markers that are uniform across individuals.
There are two major anatomical markers on the dorsal surface of the brain that are formed when the plates of the skull fuse during development, and these markers are often used to identify the location of various anatomical structures of the brain.

<img src="images/bregma_and_lambda.png" alt="Bregma and Lambda anatomical reference points" style="max-width: 600px;">

**Bregma**: the anatomical point on the skull at which the coronal suture (between frontal and parietal bones) is intersected perpendicularly by the sagittal suture (between left and right parietal bones).

**Lambda**: the meeting point of the sagittal suture (between left and right parietal bones) and the lambdoid suture (between parietal and occipital bones).

> Both points serve as standard reference points for stereotaxic coordinates in neuroscience research. `(0,0,0)` is assumed to be Bregma when working with rodents. It may optionally be defined differently using `coordinate_reference_point`, and MUST be defined for other species.

Author: `coordinate_reference_point`, so far, describes ref point for electrodes on the probe. Here it is used for a different purpose, as @bendichter trying also to "fixup" in [columns.yaml](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/1705/files#r2412118595).  Should we decide to allow to override here, we need to create a new column name, e.g.

```suggestion
Both points serve as standard reference points for stereotaxic coordinates in neuroscience research. `(0,0,0)` is assumed to be Bregma when working with rodents. It may optionally be defined differently using `anatomical_reference_point`, and MUST be defined for other species.
```

Reviewer 2: oh, did I make a mistake conflating coordinate_reference_point with anatomical_reference_point? I like having "anatomical_reference_point" mean the origin of the stereotaxic coordinate system. Let's keep "coordinate_reference_point" meaning the point on the probe that 1) is described by the translational coordinates of the stereotaxic coordinate system and 2) is the origin for the electrode positions

 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_json_table("json.microephys.microephysCoordsystemGeneral") }}

Fields relating to the microelectrode electrophysiology electrode positions:

<!--
This block generates a metadata table.
These tables are defined in
  src/schema/rules/sidecars
The definitions of the fields specified in these tables may be found in
  src/schema/objects/metadata.yaml
A guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_json_table("json.microephys.microephysCoordsystemPositions") }}

`*_coordsystem.json` files SHOULD NOT be duplicated for each data file,
for example, across multiple tasks.
The [inheritance principle](../common-principles.md#the-inheritance-principle) MUST
be used to find the appropriate coordinate system description for a given data file.
If electrodes are repositioned, it is RECOMMENDED to use multiple sessions to indicate this.

### Default probe-relative coordinate systems

When no [`space-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#space) entity is specified in the filename,

> electrode positions in `*_electrodes.tsv` are **probe-relative coordinates**:

Author: chatting with @CodyCBakerPhD who raises a good point (I think) that if we are to describe probe geometries , either standard, or custom under `/probes`, then why do we want this yet another way to describe coordinates for the electrodes on the probes, and in the `_probes.tsv` table in particular?  they would not be different for the same probe manufacturer/model, so why to repeat across the files? if very custom, a file under `/probes` could still be used to describe it.

# Microelectrode Electrophysiology

> Support for Microelectrode Electrophysiology was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals) [BEP032: Animal electrophysiology (ephys)](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/bep032).

Author: I found "official" https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/HEAD/CONTRIBUTING.md#soft-rules 

> Similarly try to use "hard word wrapping": if a sentence gets long and extends a line length beyond 80-100 characters, continue the sentence on the next line.

and below there the advise seems to still keep sentence end ending the line, e.g.

> Unprocessed MEG data MUST be stored in the native file format of the MEG instrument
> with which the data was collected.
> With the MEG specification of BIDS, we wish to promote the adoption of good practices
> in the management of scientific data.

@Peyman-N could you please as a first step do such reformatting so to ease adding suggestions and minimize number of commits

Reviewer 3: @yarikoptic I did it inn this pull request 
https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/2012

Author: Merged now, thank you!

## **Multiple coordinate systems**

The optional[ space-<label>](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/appendices/entities.html#space) entity (`*[_space-<label>]_coordsystem.json`) can be used to indicate how to interpret the electrode positions. The space `<label>` MUST be taken from one of the modality specific lists in the[ Coordinate Systems Appendix](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/appendices/coordinate-systems.html). For example for iEEG data, the restricted keywords listed under[ iEEG Specific Coordinate Systems](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/appendices/coordinate-systems.html#ieeg-specific-coordinate-systems) are acceptable for `<label>`.

## Probes (*_probes.tsv)

Probes are physical devices used for recording animal ephys data. They can be permanently implanted (chronic recordings) or inserted just for the recording (acute recordings). The probe positions and properties are stored in a .tsv file. This file contains the probe id, the type of recording (acute/chronic) and the probe coordinates.

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysProbes") }}

> Example of `_probes.tsv`:

Author: note, for TSVs there is ongoing
- #1794 which would render them wonderfully

you just take care about 
- annotate as `Text` for now until that PR is merged
- correctly entering them with tabs so we do not need to re-enter late

Reviewer 3: Thanks a lot I would do that

For the first subject only a single sample (a cell for patch-clamp terminology) was extracted (sample-cell001), on which two recordings (runs 1 and 2) were performed. Here, the `scans.tsv` file can be used to store information such as the starting recording times. The detailed information on the recording channel (e.g. also the recording mode used) is stored in the `channels.tsv` which, in this case, is common to all available recordings. The probes and electrodes files provide information on the pipette and solutions used for the recordings and are also shared for the two data files.

For the second subject two samples (sample-cell003 and sample-cell004) were extracted and a single recording performed on each of them. Each recording was performed using a different probe (listed in the probes.tsv) having specific electrode and channel information. Therefore, each data file has a dedicated channel and electrode file with the same name as the data file.

```

> samples.tsv

Author: use `MACROS___make_filetree_example`

The[` ses-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#ses) entity may be used to specify when the photo was taken.

## **Multiple coordinate systems**

The optional[` space-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#space) entity (`*[_space-<label>]_coordsystem.json`) can be used to indicate how to interpret the electrode positions. The space `<label>` MUST be taken from one of the modality specific lists in the [Coordinate Systems Appendix](../appendices/coordinate-systems.md). For example for iEEG data, the restricted keywords listed under[ iEEG Specific Coordinate Systems](../coordinate-systems.md#ieeg-specific-coordinate-systems) are acceptable for `<label>`.

## Probes (*_probes.tsv)

Probes are physical devices used for recording animal ephys data.
They can be permanently implanted (chronic recordings) or inserted just for the recording (acute recordings).
The probe positions and properties are stored in a `.tsv` file.
This file contains the probe id, the type of recording (acute/chronic) and the probe coordinates.

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysProbes") }}

Example of `_probes.tsv`:

```Text

> probe_id	hemisphere	x	y	z	type		material	location
> p023		left		-11.87	-1.30	-3.37	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V1
> p023		left		-11.64	0.51	-4.20	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V2
> p021		left		-12.11	-3.12	-2.54	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V4
> p021		left		-9.94	-1.19	-2.86	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V3

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
probe_id	hemisphere	x	y	z	type	material	location
p023	left	-11.87	-1.30	-3.37	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V1
p023	left	-11.64	0.51	-4.20	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V2
p021	left	-12.11	-3.12	-2.54	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V4
p021	left	-9.94	-1.19	-2.86	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V3
```

when referring to it in the context of the academic literature.

This BEP has been initiated by members of the INCF Working Group on Standardized Data Structures,
that was initiated in 2020 to develop a set of specifications and tools
that would allow the standardization of a directory structure for experimental data recorded
with animal models in neuroscience, and its associated metadata.

Please consider joining this working group if you would like to contribute to this effort.
You can also reach the moderators of this BEP through our [main discussion forum](https://github.com/INCF/neuroscience-data-structure/issues), where you can participate in existing discussions or raise new questions / issues.

Most core principles of the original BIDS and particulars of BIDS-iEEG specification are adopted
for this modality as well, though some special considerations and additional fields were added.

Several [example Microelectrode Electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-examples/#microephys)
have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

## Primary data file formats

> Unprocessed microelectrode electrophysiology (`icephys` and `ecephys` modalities) data must be stored in an [open file format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_format),

Author: ```suggestion
Unprocessed microelectrode electrophysiology (`microephys`) modality data (of `icephys` or `ecephys` datatypes) must be stored in an [open file format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_format),
```

Metadata should be included alongside the data in the `.json` and `.tsv` files.
The current list of allowed data file formats:

| **Format**                                                                          | **Extension(s)** | **Description**                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [Neuroscience Information Exchange Format](https://nixio.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) | `.nix`           | A generic and open  framework with an hdf5 backend and a defined interface to many ephys formats via the [Neo library](https://neo.readthedocs.io/en/latest/). The `.nix` file has to contain a valid Neo structure. |

> | [Neurodata Without Borders](https://www.nwb.org)                                    | `.nwb`           | BRAIN Initiative Data Standard based on an hdf5 backend ...                                                                                                                                                          |

Reviewer 2: Is the of the ellipse that you are looking for someone to fill in the details?

Author: yes, ... I will copy paste from the google doc which says now

> An open data standard for neurophysiology, including data from intracellular and extracellular electrophysiology experiments.

| **ADC**      | Analog to Digital input                                                                                                         |
| **DAC**      | Digital to Analog output                                                                                                        |
| **REF**      | Reference channel                                                                                                               |
| **OTHER**    | Any other type of channel                                                                                                       |

## Electrodes  (`*_electrodes.tsv`)

Electrodes are the physical recording sites that make electrical contact with neural tissue to capture electrophysiological signals.

The electrode positions and properties are stored in a `.tsv` file (amplifier information is in `channels.tsv`).

This file contains the following information:

-   The electrode name
-   The electrode coordinates in 3 columns (`xyz`) (use `n/a` for values if a dimension is absent). By default, this is the position on the probe (not the brain).
-   The ID of the probe the electrode is located on

> 
> {{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysElectrodes") }}

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysElectrodes") }}
```

# Microelectrode Electrophysiology

Support for Microelectrode Electrophysiology was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals) [BEP032: Animal electrophysiology (ephys)](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/bep032).
Please see [Citing BIDS](../introduction.md#citing-bids) on how to appropriately credit this extension
when referring to it in the context of the academic literature.

This BEP has been initiated by members of the INCF Working Group on Standardized Data Structures,
that was initiated in 2020 to develop a set of specifications and tools
that would allow the standardization of a directory structure for experimental data recorded
with animal models in neuroscience, and its associated metadata.

Most core principles of the original BIDS and particulars of BIDS-iEEG specification are adopted
for this modality as well, though some special considerations and additional fields were added.

!!! example "Example datasets"

>     Several [example Microelectrode Electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-examples/#microephys)

Author: ```suggestion
    Several [example Microelectrode Electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#microephys)
```

    have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

## Primary data file formats

> Microelectrode electrophysiology (`microephys`) modality data (of `icephys` or `ecephys` datatypes) must be stored in an [open file format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_format),

Author: TODO: add description of what ice and ece are and why we separate them?

Some of this metadata needs to be duplicated in BIDS `.tsv` and `.json` sidecar files.
Even though the duplication requires additional effort to ensure the consistency of the data, it provides several advantages:

-   It makes the dataset easier for humans to scan, as essential information is easily accessible without loading the data files.
-   The dataset adheres to the BIDS standard and can benefit from tools built on top of this standard, such as [bids-validator](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-validator).
-   It simplifies the separation of data and basic metadata, enabling, for example, the publication of a dataset in a lightweight fashion with access to the data files on request (as implemented by [DataLad](https://www.datalad.org)).

<!--
This block generates a filename templates.
The inputs for this macro can be found in the directory
  src/schema/rules/files/raw
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->

<!-- Link Definitions -->

### icephys
{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(
   "raw",
   datatypes=["icephys"],

>    suffixes=["icephys", "events", "channels", "electrodes","scans","probes","coordsystem"]

Author: @ree-gupta mentioned that there is no `_electrodes` in the rendering -- to be checked why.

)
}}

### ecephys
{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(
   "raw",
   datatypes=["ecephys"],

>    suffixes=["ecephys", "events", "channels", "electrodes","scans","probes","coordsystem"]

Author: in both types of files we might have `_photo.jpg` -- may be should be added here too?

)
}}

> ## Participant information
> 
> The `participants.tsv` file is located at the root of the data set directory.
> Its presence is RECOMMENDED in order to describe information about the individual subjects (animals) from which the data was recorded.
> It follows the [general BIDS specifications to describe participants](../modality-agnostic-files.md#participants-file).
> 
> On top of the existing columns that can be present in this file and that are described in the BIDS specifications (`participant_id`, `species`, `strain`, `strain_rrid`, `sex`, `handedness`, and `age`), we propose to allow adding the following ones:
> 

Author: per discussion as nothing custom -- remove altogether

```suggestion
```

2. `[_ses-<session_label>]_electrodes.tsv`: A REQUIRED file listing information on the points of electrical contact to the tissue, such as impedance, names, relative positions, and others.
3. `[_ses-<session_label>]_channels.tsv`: A REQUIRED file listing information on the recorded signals, such as preprocessing, filtering, ids, and others.

As with all tsv-based metadata files in BIDS the probes, electrodes and channels tsv files can be accompanied by json sidecar files.

## Coordinate System JSON (`*_coordsystem.json`) & Photos of electrode positions (`_photo.jpg`)

This file provides metadata on the coordinate system in which the electrodes are placed.
This file is **RECOMMENDED**, and the listed required fields below must be included if a `*_coordsystem.json` file is provided.

The coordinate system can be defined using reference pictures, anatomical landmarks, brain images, or a reference atlas.
For more details, see the [BIDS Coordinate Systems specifications](../appendices/coordinate-systems.md).

> Fields relating to the microephys probe and electrode positions:

Author: somewhere here we should adopt (take and adjust, potentially extend) the figure from probeinterfaces:

https://probeinterface.readthedocs.io/en/main/ to visualize relations between electrodes and probes and channels

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ae7ede3a-eaea-427f-91b5-7c10d794d14e)

### ProbeInterface Library
`ProbeInterface` is a library that defines a standard for specifying electrode layouts on probes.
The `ProbeInterface` library includes layouts for many common probes.

The `ProbeInterface` model corresponding to your probe can be referenced using:

- `probeinterface_manufacturer`
- `probeinterface_model`

If provided, these should point to a `ProbeInterface` model in the `ProbeInterface` library,
at the location:

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysProbes") }}

Example of `_probes.tsv`:

```tsv
probe_id	hemisphere	x	y	z	type	material	location
p023	left	-11.87	-1.30	-3.37	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V1
p023	left	-11.64	0.51	-4.20	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V2
p021	left	-12.11	-3.12	-2.54	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V4
p021	left	-9.94	-1.19	-2.86	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V3
```

## Electrodes  (*_electrodes.tsv)

Electrodes describe the points of contact between the electrodes and the tissue used for recording electrophysiological signals.

The electrode positions and properties are stored in a `.tsv` file (amplifier information is in `channels.tsv`).

This file contains the following information:
- The electrode name

> - The electrode coordinates in 3 columns (`xyz`)

Author: ```suggestion
- The electrode coordinates in 3 columns (`xyz`) (use `n/a` for values if a dimension is absent)
```

This file contains the following information:

- `channel_id`
- `electrode_id` (in the case of neuronal signals)
- Amplifier information
- …

For more information about the distinction between electrodes and channels, see [the corresponding section in iEEG](./intracranial-electroencephalography.md#terminology-electrodes-vs-channels).

Columns in the `*_channel.tsv` file are:

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysChannels") }}

Example of * _channels.tsv:

```tsv
channel_id	electrode_id	gain	type	units	sampling_frequency	status
c0123	con0123	30	EXT	mV	30000	good
c234	con234	30	EXT	mV	30000	good
c934	con934	50	EXT	mV	30000	bad
c234	n/a	1	SYNC	mV	1000	good
```

Note: In many datasets multiple sets of identifiers are used for probes, electrodes and channels.
We RECOMMEND to include alternative sets of identifiers, for instance identifiers that enumerate electrodes according to their spatial arrangement, as additional custom columns in the `.tsv` file.

**Recommended Channel Type Values**

For the `type` column we recommend to use the following terms (adopted from [iEEG](intracranial-electroencephalography.md#channelselectrode-description-_channelselectrodestsv))

> | **Keyword**   | **Description**                                                        |

Author: TODO for @yarikoptic -- replace with a macro (if possible)

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysPharmaceuticals") }}

#### Sample

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysSample") }}

#### Supplementary

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysSupplementary") }}

### Probes

It is RECOMMENDED to use the following structure to provide more metadata for each probe:

```JSON
"ProbeContours": {
   "probe_infoid": {
      "<my_probe_id>": {
         "Contour": "<list of contour points>",
         "Unit": "<my spatial unit>"
      }
   }
}
```

Whereas `<my_probe_id>` has to exist also in the `probes.tsv` file and `<list of contour points>` is
a list of x, y(, z) tuples providing the contour of the probe in the same reference frame as the
electrode coordinates (see `electrodes.tsv`).
In case of different units used than in the `electrodes.tsv`, the key `Unit` can be used here to
provide the spatial unit of the coordinate points.

### Task (*see also  iEEG.json*)

If the OPTIONAL [` task-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#task) is used, the following metadata SHOULD be used.

{{ MACROS___make_sidecar_table("microephys.microephysTaskInformation") }}

> ### Example of * _ephys.json:

Reviewer 5: _ephys.json does not exist anymore as suffix, no? should be icephys and ecephys

in the `*_events.tsv` file.

These two options are made available to support different usages and habits of the experimenters, as
well as to benefit from the capability of the supported data formats (NWB and NIX).
They are described in the following subsections, and made explicit through some of the example data sets.

### Multiple tasks / runs in separate files (*_scans.tsv)

The `*_scans.tsv` should be used to provide information about multiple parts of an acquisition
session (for example, recording start times in case the recording was paused and restarted)
when the data from each of these different recordings is stored in separate files.
Each data file should have a name that contains a `_task-XX` and/or `_run-XX` suffix, and
should be described by at most one row in the `*_scans.tsv` file. See also the BIDS Scans
specification.
Relative paths to files should be used under a compulsory “filename” header.
If acquisition time is included, it should be with the “acq_time” header. Datetime should
be expressed in the following format 2009-06-15T13:45:30 (year, month, day, hour (24h),
minute, second; this is equivalent to the RFC3339 “date-time” format, time zone is always

> assumed as local time).

Author: I recalled we had some discussion but -- shouldn't we allow here timezone specification and assume "local" (which would be what? any placement to state?) only if not specified?

Reviewer 5: Does this even play a role? Important is that within the same BIDS dataset time is specified within the same time zone, no?

Reviewer 5: we should probably raise awareness that this information might be GDPR sensitive?

Author: - we might want to just refer to `Units` section in https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/fa58763066369de94c0753312417222119e37d3e/src/common-principles.md?plain=1#L987 describing time format.
- in the same file we have on shift of the dates for privacy protection: https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/fa58763066369de94c0753312417222119e37d3e/src/common-principles.md?plain=1#L1039 .  

I think we might want to make a separate PR that 
- would make that privacy protection of dates more prominent in that document
- make it a subsection we could refer to here (and possibly other places throughout BIDS)
- mention specifically GDPR and HIPPA

WDYT?

ephys/sub-P001_task-push_run-02_ephys.nix	2018-07-15T15:24:00
```

It is recommended to accompany the  `*_scans.tsv` file with a corresponding `*_scans.json`
sidecar file, as described in the [BIDS specifications](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/03-modality-agnostic-files.html#scans-file).

### Multiple recordings in a single data file (*_events.tsv)

The `*_events.tsv` should be used to provide information about multiple parts of an acquisition
session when the data from each of these different recordings is stored in a single data file.
In such a case, this file is REQUIRED.
This allows benefiting from the capability of the supported data formats (NIX and NWB) to store multiple
recordings in a single file, which can be convenient when these recordings share numerous characteristics
(for example, for subsequent recordings obtained on a single cell in intracellular electrophysiology).
In such case, the information about these recordings should be stored in columns added in the
`*_events.tsv` file, which are listed now.

Optional column names in `events.tsv` to support multiple recordings in a single data file:

<!-- TODO: Macro for events -->

> ## BIDS-animal-ephys examples
> 
> 
> ## Examples of toy datasets

Author: ```suggestion
## Microelectrode Electrophysiology Examples

### Toy datasets
```

this information is shared between data files (see BIDS Inheritance Principle): in the first session,
the probe, electrode and channel files apply to both data files of that session, as they do not
contain a `task` entity in their name. For the nose-poke task, additional behavioral timestamps
(events) were recorded and stored in an additional `events.tsv` file.

<!-- TODO: Use macro for filetree -->

```
dataset_description.json
tasks.tsv
tasks.json
participants.tsv
sub-A/
  	ses-20220101/
    		ephys/
        sub-A_ses-20220101_task-nosepoke_ephys.nix
        sub-A_ses-20220101_task-nosepoke_ephys.json
        sub-A_ses-20220101_task-nosepoke_events.tsv
        sub-A_ses-20220101_task-rest_ephys.nix
        sub-A_ses-20220101_task-rest_ephys.json
        sub-A_ses-20220101_channels.tsv
        sub-A_ses-20220101_electrodes.tsv
        sub-A_ses-20220101_probes.tsv
  	ses-20220102/
    		ephys/
        sub-A_ses-20220102_task-rest_ephys.nix
        sub-A_ses-20220102_task-rest_ephys.json
        sub-A_ses-20220102_channels.tsv
        sub-A_ses-20220102_electrodes.tsv
        sub-A_ses-20220102_probes.tsv

> ```

Reviewer 2: to do: use filetree macro

Author: note: we could use a helper for that -- should be trivial to code up in principle and could come handy for others ... let's see if my prompt would produce usable ... chatgpt did quite cool looping trying to make it work but I got claude faster interactively to give a script for which embedded tests passed...

here is the script http://www.oneukrainian.com/tmp/text2tree3.py and for this one I think it produced correct output after I gave it that tab should be just a single space:

```shell
❯ cat ~/.npm/ex | /tmp/text2tree3.py --tab-width 1
{
  "dataset_description.json": "",
  "tasks.tsv": "",
  "tasks.json": "",
  "participants.tsv": "",
  "sub-A/": {
    "ses-20220101/": {
      "ephys/": {
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_task-nosepoke_ephys.nix": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_task-nosepoke_ephys.json": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_task-nosepoke_events.tsv": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_task-rest_ephys.nix": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_task-rest_ephys.json": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_channels.tsv": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_electrodes.tsv": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220101_probes.tsv": ""
      }
    },
    "ses-20220102/": {
      "ephys/": {
        "sub-A_ses-20220102_task-rest_ephys.nix": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220102_task-rest_ephys.json": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220102_channels.tsv": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220102_electrodes.tsv": "",
        "sub-A_ses-20220102_probes.tsv": ""
      }
    }
  }
}
```

I will adjust all such examples now while at it!

Author: FWIW, proposing
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/pull/2014

  src/schema/rules/files/raw
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->

<!-- Link Definitions -->

{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(
   "raw",
   datatypes=["icephys"],
   suffixes=["icephys", "events", "channels", "electrodes","scans","probes","coordsystem"]
)
}}

{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(
   "raw",
   datatypes=["ecephys"],
   suffixes=["ecephys", "events", "channels", "electrodes","scans","probes","coordsystem"]
)
}}

#  PARTICIPANT keyfiles
## Participant information

The `participants.tsv` file is located at the root of the data set directory.
Its presence is RECOMMENDED in order to describe information about the individual subjects (animals) from which the data was recorded.
It follows the [general BIDS specifications to describe participants](../modality-agnostic-files.md#participants-file).

On top of the existing columns that can be present in this file and that are described in the BIDS specifications (`participant_id`, `species`, `strain`, `strain_rrid`, `sex`, `handedness`, and `age`), we propose to allow adding the following ones:

> 

Reviewer 2: It looks like this section is missing

Reviewer 3: @bendichter The additional fields were introduced in #1839. If I had implemented the macro for them, it would have crashed since it is not included in this pull request. That said, I think we should delete this section because, according to the current implementation, all these fields would be part of the [participants](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/modality-agnostic-files.html#participants-file) section in the Modality-Agnostic Files (aka the main one), making it redundant.
However, I don't think it’s a good practice to add them to the general participants section. This could lead some people to include `birthdate` for human data, which is not acceptable. On the other hand, `birthdate` is necessary for animal data. Unfortunately, I don’t have a solution for enforcing this selectively.

#  EPHYS specific files

> The following metadata files are REQUIRED for a given animal ephys session:

Author: I think in this context we can generalize to just

```suggestion
The following metadata files are REQUIRED for a given microephys session:
```

since this specification was renamed into 'microelectrode' from 'animal' electrophysiology and indeed could be applied to humans and my damn car when I stick some electrode into it ;)

1. `[_ses-<session_label>]_probes.tsv`: A REQUIRED file listing information on the device used to acquire the electrophysiology data, such as implant or probe specification, location, material, and others.
2. `[_ses-<session_label>]_electrodes.tsv`: A REQUIRED file listing information on the points of electrical contact to the tissue, such as impedance, names, relative positions, and others.
3. `[_ses-<session_label>]_channels.tsv`: A REQUIRED file listing information on the recorded signals, such as preprocessing, filtering, ids, and others.

As with all tsv-based metadata files in BIDS the probes, electrodes and channels tsv files can be accompanied by json sidecar files.

## Coordinate System JSON (`*_coordsystem.json`) & Photos of electrode positions (`_photo.jpg`)

> 

Reviewer 2: We recently settled on the idea that the coordinate system of the standard electrodes.tsv file (without a "space" designation") should be in probe space. This means that x, and y, (and maybe z), should be relative positions of contacts on the probe. It would be idea if the (0,0) point is the tip of the probe, but honestly this is not really important for spike sorting.

Reviewer 2: I think it's a bit strange to discuss coordinate systems before we discuss probes and electrodes. Is there a motivation for having these sections in the current order or can I move things around a bit?

Reviewer 5: SUGGESTED ORDER: 
+ channels first
+ electrodes second
+ probes third
+ coordinate systems last

> This file provides metadata on the global coordinate system in which the electrodes are placed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This file provides metadata on the coordinate system in which the electrodes are placed.
```

I think the word "global" is confusing here. Is it serving a purpose I am missing?

This file is **RECOMMENDED**, and the listed required fields below must be included if a `*_coordsystem.json` file is provided.

The coordinate system can be defined using reference pictures, anatomical landmarks, brain images, or a reference atlas.
For more details, see the [BIDS Coordinate Systems specifications](../appendices/coordinate-systems.md).

Fields relating to the ephys probe and electrode  positions:

{{ MACROS___make_metadata_table(
   {
        "MicroephysCoordinateSystem":"REQUIRED",
        "MicroephysCoordinateUnits":"REQUIRED",
        "MicroephysCoordinateSystemDescription":"RECOMMENDED",
        "MicroephysCoordinateSystemPhoto":"OPTIONAL",

>         "MEGCoordinateSystem":"REQUIRED",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

was this included by mistake?

Reviewer 3: Yes, my bad, sorry it is a mistake and should be deleted.

If there are photos of the electrodes, the [`_acq-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#acq) entity should be specified with:

- `*_photo.jpg` for an operative photo.
- `*_acq-xray#_photo.<extension>` for an X-ray picture.
- `*_acq-drawing#_photo.<extension>` for a drawing or sketch of electrode placements.
- `*_acq-render#_photo.<extension>` for a rendering.

The file `<extension>` for photos MUST be either `.jpg`, `.png`, or `.tif`.

The [`ses-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#ses) entity may be used to specify when the photo was taken.

## **Multiple coordinate systems**

The optional[` space-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#space) entity (`*[_space-<label>]_coordsystem.json`) can be used to indicate how to interpret the electrode positions. The space `<label>` MUST be taken from one of the modality specific lists in the [Coordinate Systems Appendix](../appendices/coordinate-systems.md). For example for iEEG data, the restricted keywords listed under [iEEG Specific Coordinate Systems](../appendices/coordinate-systems.md#ieeg-specific-coordinate-systems) are acceptable for `<label>`.

## Probes (*_probes.tsv)

> Probes are physical devices used for recording animal electrophysiology (ephys) data.

Author: similarly to above

```suggestion
Probes are physical devices used for recording microephys data.
```
?  `microephys` modality is defined earlier in this document so we should be fine AFAIK

### ProbeInterface Library
`ProbeInterface` is a library that defines a standard for specifying electrode layouts on probes.
The `ProbeInterface` library includes layouts for many common probes.

The `ProbeInterface` model corresponding to your probe can be referenced using:

- `probeinterface_manufacturer`
- `probeinterface_model`

If provided, these should point to a `ProbeInterface` model in the `ProbeInterface` library,
at the location:

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysProbes") }}

Example of `_probes.tsv`:

```tsv
probe_id	hemisphere	x	y	z	type	material	location
p023	left	-11.87	-1.30	-3.37	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V1
p023	left	-11.64	0.51	-4.20	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V2
p021	left	-12.11	-3.12	-2.54	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V4
p021	left	-9.94	-1.19	-2.86	utah-array	iridium-oxide	V3
```

## Electrodes  (*_electrodes.tsv)

Electrodes describe the points of contact between the electrodes and the tissue used for recording electrophysiological signals.

The electrode positions and properties are stored in a `.tsv` file (amplifier information is in `channels.tsv`).

This file contains the following information:
- The electrode name

> - The electrode coordinates in 3 columns (`xyz`)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The electrode coordinates in 2 or 3 columns (`xy[z]`)
```

Reviewer 5: Depends if we assume always 3 columns with z put to n/a for 2D

- The ID of the probe the electrode is located on

> The coordinates are relative to the position on the probe.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the 'space' label is not defined, the coordinates are relative position on the probe. To specify electrode positions in subject-space, an atlas space, or some other space, use another electrodes.tsv file with the [space-<label>](https://bids-specification.readthedocs.io/en/stable/appendices/entities.html#space) entity: (`*[_space-<label>]_electrodes.tsv`). Each of these additional electrodes.tsv files should be accompanied by a coordsystem.json file.

For example:

└─ sub-01/
   ├─ sub-01_space-Talairach_electrodes.tsv 
   ├─ sub-01_space-Talairach_coordsystem.json 
   └─ ... 
   
   
```

Author: for example would need to use `MACROS___make_filetree_example` for the example

(for example, synchronization or behavioral signals).

The channel properties are stored in a `.tsv` file.
This file contains the following information:

- `channel_id`
- `electrode_id` (in the case of neuronal signals)
- Amplifier information
- …

For more information about the distinction between electrodes and channels, see [the corresponding section in iEEG](./intracranial-electroencephalography.md#terminology-electrodes-vs-channels).

Columns in the `*_channel.tsv` file are:

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysChannels") }}

Example of * _channels.tsv:

```tsv
channel_id	electrode_id	gain	type	units	sampling_frequency	status
c0123	con0123	30	EXT	mV	30000	good
c234	con234	30	EXT	mV	30000	good
c934	con934	50	EXT	mV	30000	bad
c234	n/a	1	SYNC	mV	1000	good
```

Note: In many datasets multiple sets of identifiers are used for probes, electrodes and channels.
We RECOMMEND to include alternative sets of identifiers, for instance identifiers that enumerate electrodes according to their spatial arrangement, as additional custom columns in the `.tsv` file.

**Recommended Channel Type Values**

> For the `type` column we recommend to use the following terms (adopted from [iEEG](intracranial-electroencephalography.md#channelselectrode-description-_channelselectrodestsv))

Reviewer 5: if this is an enum list we may not need this table hardcoded but have it in a schema and pulled in?

> For the `type` column we recommend to use the following terms (adopted from [iEEG](intracranial-electroencephalography.md#channelselectrode-description-_channelselectrodestsv))

Reviewer 5: replace EXT in example above with more specific channel type (e.g. LFP, MUA, SPIKES,etc )

| **PD**        | Photodiode                                                              |
| **EYEGAZE**   | Eye Tracker gaze                                                        |
| **PUPIL**     | Eye Tracker pupil diameter                                              |
| **BEH**       | Behavioral signals                                                      |
| **MISC**      | Miscellaneous                                                           |
| **SYSCLOCK**  | System time showing elapsed time since trial started                    |
| **ADC**       | Analog to Digital input                                                 |
| **DAC**       | Digital to Analog output                                                 |
| **REF**       | Reference channel                                                       |
| **OTHER**     | Any other type of channel                                               |

## General ephys metadata (*_ephys.json)

We propose to store all metadata that is not directly related to one of the other metadata files (probe/electrode/channel information) into a single JSON file: `_ephys.json`.

> There should be one such JSON file for each data file.

Reviewer 2: I'm not really sure what this means

> The `*_ephys.json` file can be used to store any ephys-specific metadata for the dataset. We recommend storing all setup-related metadata in a dedicated node of the JSON file called `Setup`.

Author: we have no `_microephys` suffix but two `_ecephys` and `_icephys`, see e.g. examples in rendered version: https://bids-specification--1705.org.readthedocs.build/en/1705/modality-specific-files/microelectrode-electrophysiology.html#primary-data-file-formats .

> The `*_ephys.json` file can be used to store any ephys-specific metadata for the dataset. We recommend storing all setup-related metadata in a dedicated node of the JSON file called `Setup`.

Reviewer 5: true

   {
        "PharmaceuticalName":"OPTIONAL",
        "PharmaceuticalDoseAmount":"OPTIONAL",
        "PharmaceuticalDoseRegimen":"OPTIONAL",
        "PharmaceuticalDoseTime":"OPTIONAL",
        "PharmaceuticalDoseUnit":"OPTIONAL",
        "SupplementarySignals":"OPTIONAL",
        "BodyPart":"RECOMMENDED",
        "BodyPartDetails":"RECOMMENDED",
        "BodyPartDetailsOntology":"OPTIONAL",
        "SampleEnvironment":"RECOMMENDED",
        "SampleEmbedding":"OPTIONAL",
        "SliceThickness":"OPTIONAL",
        "SampleExtractionProtocol":"OPTIONAL",
   }
) }}

### Probes

It is RECOMMENDED to use the following structure to provide more metadata for each probe:

```JSON
"ProbeContours": {
   "probe_infoid": {
      "<my_probe_id>": {
         "Contour": <list of contour points>,
         "Unit": "<my spatial unit>"
      }
   }
}
```

Whereas `<my_probe_id>` has to exist also in the `probes.tsv` file and `<list of contour points>` is
a list of x, y(, z) tuples providing the contour of the probe in the same reference frame as the
electrode coordinates (see `electrodes.tsv`).
In case of different units used than in the `electrodes.tsv`, the key `Unit` can be used here to

> provide the spatial unit of the coordinate points.

Reviewer 2: This is an accurate depiction of what was discussed in the November 2024, meeting, but in the December 2024 meeting we decided to punt on the countour specification, since it's a bit tricky to include, we might want to refer to ProbeInterface, and it's not critical for spike sorting.

        "PharmaceuticalDoseAmount": 0.1,
        "PharmaceuticalDoseUnit": "ug/kg/min"
      }
    },
    "Sample": {
      "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
      "BodyPartDetails": "Motor Cortex"
    },
    "ProbeContours": {
      "p021": {
        "Contour": [
          [0, 0, 0],
          [0, 10, 0],
          [1, 11, 0],
          [2, 10, 0],
          [2, 0, 0]
        ],
        "Unit": "mm"
      }
    },
    "TaskName": "Reach-to-Grasp",
    "TaskDescription": "A task that involves the reaching of an object and holding it for a specific time"
  }
}
```

## Recording Events (*_events.tsv)

The `*_events.tsv` and corresponding `*_events.json` sidecar files are OPTIONAL and can be used to
indicate time points of recording events. Each task events file requires a corresponding task data
file. These events can be internal recording system events, task-related events, or events triggered
by the experimentalist (for example, manual reward). Note that these events must share a common clock
with the corresponding ephys recording data. For more details, see the
Task Events documentation.
Note that this file can also be used to describe stimulation performed during the recording. For this,

> please follow the iEEG stimulation documentation.

Reviewer 2: To do: add links here.

## Multi-part recordings

> Two different procedures are supported to handle multi-part recordings. In short, the two options are:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two different procedures are supported to handle multi-part recordings. The two options are:
```

i) each recording is stored in an independent data file, and the corresponding metadata is described
in the `*_scans.tsv` file; or
ii) several recordings are stored in a single data file, and the corresponding metadata is described
in the `*_events.tsv` file.
These two options are made available to support different usages and habits of the experimenters, as
well as to benefit from the capability of the supported data formats (NWB and NIX).

> They are described in the following subsections, and made explicit through some of the example data sets.

Reviewer 2: My read of the BIDS standard is that (i) _scans.tsv is the more canonical approach. What is the justification for supporting both methods?

Author: also unclear to me on why _scans.tsv to be used here at all for "events" related info.

also smells very related to https://bids.neuroimaging.io/bep037 "Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation (NIBS)" ... and questions on how Deep Brain Stimulation (no BEP yet) would do it... 

In that bep037 I referred to 
- https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/issues/2027

where to potential describe some common to devices metadata.

### Multiple tasks / runs in separate files (*_scans.tsv)

The `*_scans.tsv` should be used to provide information about multiple parts of an acquisition
session (for example, recording start times in case the recording was paused and restarted)
when the data from each of these different recordings is stored in separate files.
Each data file should have a name that contains a `_task-XX` and/or `_run-XX` suffix, and

> should be described by at most one row in the `*_scans.tsv` file. See also the BIDS Scans

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
should be described by one row in the `*_scans.tsv` file. See also the BIDS Scans
```

why "at most"? Shouldn't it be exactly 1, so this scan file can specify the start time?

specification.
Relative paths to files should be used under a compulsory “filename” header.
If acquisition time is included, it should be with the “acq_time” header. Datetime should

> be expressed in the following format 2009-06-15T13:45:30 (year, month, day, hour (24h),
> minute, second; this is equivalent to the RFC3339 “date-time” format, time zone is always
> assumed as local time).

Author: Fixing up a bit:

```suggestion
be expressed in the RFC3339 "date-time" format, for example `2009-06-15T13:45:30` (year, month, day, hour (24h), minute, second). Time zone is always assumed as local time.
```

?

As with all tsv-based metadata files in BIDS the probes, electrodes and channels tsv files can be accompanied by json sidecar files.

### Channels Description  (`*_channels.tsv`)

Channels are recorded signals.
These may be of neuronal origin (for example, online filtered LFP signals) or generated by the recording setup
(for example, synchronization or behavioral signals).

The channel properties are stored in a `.tsv` file.
This file contains the following information:

-   `channel_id`
-   `electrode_id` (in the case of neuronal signals)
-   Amplifier information
-   …

This table stores information about the recorded signals, *not* the electrodes. The distinction is particularly important in cases where multiple signals are recorded from a single electrode (such as Neuropixel probes). For more information about the distinction between electrodes and channels, see [the corresponding section in iEEG](./intracranial-electroencephalography.md#terminology-electrodes-vs-channels).

Columns in the `*_channel.tsv` file are:

{{ MACROS___make_columns_table("microephys.microephysChannels") }}

#### Example *_channels.tsv

```tsv

> channel_id	electrode_id	gain	type	units	sampling_frequency	status

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
channel_id	reference	gain	type	units	sampling_frequency	status
```

> channel_id	electrode_id	gain	type	units	sampling_frequency	status

Reviewer 2: LARGE CHANGE: change channel_id to name

# Microelectrode Electrophysiology

Support for Microelectrode Electrophysiology was developed as a [BIDS Extension Proposal](../extensions.md#bids-extension-proposals) [BEP032: Animal electrophysiology (ephys)](https://bids.neuroimaging.io/bep032).
Please see [Citing BIDS](../introduction.md#citing-bids) on how to appropriately credit this extension
when referring to it in the context of the academic literature.

This BEP has been initiated by members of the INCF Working Group on Standardized Data Structures,
that was initiated in 2020 to develop a set of specifications and tools
that would allow the standardization of a directory structure for experimental data recorded
with animal models in neuroscience, and its associated metadata.

Most core principles of the original BIDS and particulars of BIDS-iEEG specification are adopted
for this modality as well, though some special considerations and additional fields were added.

!!! example "Example datasets"

> Several [example Microelectrode Electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#microephys)
> have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Several [example Microelectrode Electrophysiology datasets](https://bids-website.readthedocs.io/en/latest/datasets/examples.html#microephys)
    have been formatted using this specification and can be used for practical guidance when curating a new dataset.
```

### Example `*_icephys.json` and `*_ecephys.json`

<!-- TODO: below there is Procedure.Pharmaceuticals which is not standardized since ATM there is only single pharmaceutical "allowed" and we have no "Procedure" -->

```JSON
{
  "PowerLineFrequency": 50,
  "Manufacturer": "OpenEphys",
  "ManufacturerModelName": "OpenEphys Starter Kit",
  "ManufacturerModelVersion": "OEPS-9031",
  "SamplingFrequency": 30000,
  "SamplingFrequencyUnit": "Hz",
  "Location": "Institut de Neurosciences de la Timone, Faculté de Médecine, 27, boulevard Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille - France",
  "Software": "Cerebus",
  "SoftwareVersion": "1.5.1",
  "Creator": "John Doe",
  "Maintainer": "John Doe jr.",
  "Procedure": {
    "Pharmaceuticals": {
      "isoflurane": {
        "PharmaceuticalName": "isoflurane",
        "PharmaceuticalDoseAmount": 50,
        "PharmaceuticalDoseUnit": "ug/kg/min"
      },
      "ketamine": {
        "PharmaceuticalName": "ketamine",
        "PharmaceuticalDoseAmount": 0.1,
        "PharmaceuticalDoseUnit": "ug/kg/min"
      }
    },
    "Sample": {
      "BodyPart": "BRAIN",
      "BodyPartDetails": "Motor Cortex"
    },

>     "ProbeContours": {
>       "p021": {
>         "Contour": [
>           [0, 0, 0],
>           [0, 10, 0],
>           [1, 11, 0],
>           [2, 10, 0],
>           [2, 0, 0]
>         ],
>         "Unit": "mm"
>       }
>     },

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think we agreed the solution here was to either:
1. Reference a probe in the probe interface library or
2. Define the custom probe interface file.

We had considered putting the information here, but decided against it.

![Bregma and Lambda anatomical reference points](images/bregma_and_lambda.png)

**Bregma**: the anatomical point on the skull at which the coronal suture (between frontal and parietal bones) is intersected perpendicularly by the sagittal suture (between left and right parietal bones).

**Lambda**: the meeting point of the sagittal suture (between left and right parietal bones) and the lambdoid suture (between parietal and occipital bones).

Both points serve as standard reference points for stereotaxic coordinates in neuroscience research. `(0,0,0)` is assumed to be Bregma when working with rodents. It may optionally be defined differently using `coordinate_reference_point`, and **must** be defined for other species.

### Stereotaxic Coordinate System Conventions

#### Basic Coordinate System

All stereotaxic coordinate systems follow a right-handed coordinate system with the following conventions:

![AP_ML_DV coordinate system](images/AP_ML_DV.png)

-   **AP (Anterior-Posterior) axis:** Positive values are anterior to reference point
-   **ML (Medial-Lateral) axis:** Positive values are to the right (as seen from behind)

> -   **DV (Dorsal-Ventral) axis:**: Positive values are ventral (following right-hand rule). For humans, this is the superior-inferior axis, and positive values point to inferior.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   **DV (Dorsal-Ventral) axis:** Positive values are ventral (following right-hand rule). For humans, this is the superior-inferior axis, and positive values point to inferior.
```

-   The dataset adheres to the BIDS standard and can benefit from tools built on top of this standard, such as [bids-validator](https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-validator).
-   It simplifies the separation of data and basic metadata, enabling, for example, the publication of a dataset in a lightweight fashion with access to the data files on request (as implemented by [DataLad](https://www.datalad.org)).

<!--
This block generates a filename templates.
The inputs for this macro can be found in the directory
  src/schema/rules/files/raw
and a guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->

<!-- Link Definitions -->

### icephys

{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(
"raw",
datatypes=["icephys"],
suffixes=["icephys", "events", "channels", "electrodes","scans","probes","coordsystem"]
)
}}

### ecephys

{{ MACROS___make_filename_template(
"raw",
datatypes=["ecephys"],
suffixes=["ecephys", "events", "channels", "electrodes","scans","probes","coordsystem"]
)
}}

## Sidecar JSON (`*_icephys.json` and `*_ecephys.json`)

> We propose to store all metadata that is not directly related to one of the other metadata files (probe/electrode/channel information) into a single JSON file corresponding to the datatype: `_icephys.json` or `_ecephys.json` for intracellular and extracellular correspondingly.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
All metadata that is not directly related to one of the other metadata files (probe/electrode/channel information) should be stored in a single JSON file corresponding to the datatype: `_icephys.json` or `_ecephys.json` for intracellular and extracellular, respectively.
```

The `stream_id` SHOULD reference the data array or signal within the NIX file structure that contains the recordings for that channel, following the NIX/Neo data organization.

**Multiple data streams:**
If a single channel's data spans multiple neurodata objects within a file or across multiple files,
the `stream_id` MUST be specified as a comma-separated list.
For example: `/acquisition/ElectricalSeries1,/acquisition/ElectricalSeries2` or
`file1.nwb:/acquisition/ElectricalSeries,file2.nwb:/acquisition/ElectricalSeries`.

### Example `*_channels.tsv`

**Extracellular electrophysiology example:**

```tsv
name	reference	type	units	sampling_frequency	gain	status	status_description
ch001	ref01	LFP	uV	1000	500	good	n/a
ch002	ref01	LFP	uV	1000	500	good	n/a
ch003	ref01	HP	uV	30000	500	good	n/a
ch004	ref01	HP	uV	30000	500	bad	high_noise
ch005	ref02	LFP	uV	1000	500	good	n/a
ch006	n/a	SYNC	V	30000	1	good	n/a
```

**Intracellular electrophysiology example:**

```tsv
name	type	units	sampling_frequency	recording_mode	gain	ground	status
patch01	VM	mV	20000	current-clamp	10	AgCl	good
patch02	VM	mV	20000	current-clamp	10	AgCl	good
patch03	IM	pA	20000	voltage-clamp	5	AgCl	good

> ```

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```tsv
name	reference	type	units	sampling_frequency	recording_mode	gain	ground	status
patch01	ref01	VM	mV	20000	current-clamp	10	AgCl	good
patch02	ref02	VM	mV	20000	current-clamp	10	AgCl	good
sharp01	n/a	IM	pA	20000	voltage-clamp	5	AgCl	good
```
```

Just noticed two things here while working on nwb2bids support for icephys (using these examples as a 'tutorial'/ground truth)

1) the third entry from the electrode table had a slightly different name `sharp01`
2) the `reference` column is required

Adjusting this for consistency and accuracy

### Example `*_electrodes.tsv`

**Extracellular electrophysiology example (probe-relative coordinates):**

```tsv
name	probe_name	hemisphere	x	y	z	impedance	shank_id	size	material	location
e001	probe01	L	0	0	0	1.2	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e002	probe01	L	0	0	25	1.1	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e003	probe01	L	0	0	50	1.3	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e004	probe01	L	0	0	75	1.4	0	15	iridium-oxide	MOp
e005	probe02	R	0	0	0	2.1	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e006	probe02	R	0	0	15	2.3	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e007	probe02	R	0	0	30	1.9	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
e008	probe02	R	0	0	45	2.0	n/a	12	tungsten	CA1
```

**Intracellular electrophysiology example:**

```tsv
name	probe_name	hemisphere	x	y	z	impedance	pipette_solution	internal_pipette_diameter	external_pipette_diameter	material	location
patch01	pipette01	L	0	0	0	5.2	K-gluconate	1.5	2.5	borosilicate-glass	VISp2/3
patch02	pipette02	R	0	0	0	4.8	K-gluconate	1.5	2.5	borosilicate-glass	VISp2/3
sharp01	pipette03	L	0	0	0	80	3M KCl	0.5	1.0	borosilicate-glass	PL5
```

## Probes description (`*_probes.tsv`)

> Probes are electrode-bearing devices that interface with neural tissue to record electrophysiological activity, ranging from multi-electrode arrays to single recording pipettes. They can be permanently implanted (chronic recordings) or inserted temporarily for the recording (acute recordings).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Probes are electrode-bearing devices that interface with neural tissue to record electrophysiological activity, ranging from single recording pipettes to multi-electrode arrays. They can be permanently implanted (chronic recordings) or inserted temporarily for the recording (acute recordings).
```

In this case, `MicroephysCoordinateSystem` MUST be defined as `"Pixels"`,
and `MicroephysCoordinateUnits` MUST be defined as `"pixels"`
(note the difference in capitalization).
Furthermore, the coordinates MUST be (row,column) pairs,
with (0,0) corresponding to the upper left pixel and (N,0) corresponding to the lower left pixel.

### Multiple coordinate systems

If electrode positions are known in multiple coordinate systems (for example, probe-relative, Stereotaxic,
and AllenCCFv3), these spaces can be distinguished by the [`space-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#space)
entity.
Note that the [`space-<label>`](../appendices/entities.md#space) fields must correspond
between `*_electrodes.tsv` and `*_coordsystem.json` if they refer to the same
data.

For example:

<!-- This block generates a file tree.
A guide for using macros can be found at
 https://github.com/bids-standard/bids-specification/blob/master/macros_doc.md
-->
{{ MACROS___make_filetree_example(
   {
   "sub-01": {
      "sub-01_electrodes.tsv": "",
      "sub-01_space-Stereotaxic_electrodes.tsv": "",
      "sub-01_space-Stereotaxic_coordsystem.json": "",
      "...": "",
      },
   }
) }}

> The order of the required columns in the `*_electrodes.tsv` file MUST be as listed below.

Reviewer 6: I think this refers to the Electrode section and "below" should be replaced with "[above](#electrodes-description-_electrodestsv)"
